[Music]
all right welcome everybody
to another episode of health theory i'm
here with dr andrew
weil um dr weil thank you so much for
joining me man i am
super excited as somebody who grew up in
the 80s you are so familiar to me
uh so this is awesome happy to be here
anybody that that can talk about medical
hexing uh has me at hello
that notion of the power of belief and
how much
um the things that a practitioner or
medical practitioner can sort of leak
out
and just things that they say maybe an
offhanded comment whatever the the kind
of
impact that that can have on somebody by
framing something is either
you know that they can get over it or
not is super fascinating
well this is something that physicians
are not trained in it's the it falls
under the heading of the art of medicine
and the power of words is very great and
i think many doctors say things
unconsciously without realizing the
impact they have
and in one way or another tell patients
that they're not going to get better i'm
saying things like
you'll just have to live with it for
example
i i have found in my career as a
practitioner
that being able to give messages to
people that they can get better
is unbelievably powerful i've had many
patients come back to me
and tell me that the most important
thing that i did for them was that i was
the only doctor they saw who told them
they could get better
and that makes me sad in a way you know
that that there's such pessimism about
the possibility of healing because i
think healing is
you know universal and quite common yeah
one
one thing that i really like about the
way that you talk about that because i
am i am
super sensitive to woo-woo and
people that take things that are like
even the word healing i know you've
talked about how
nobody talked about that in medical
school which is pretty crazy
um but i as somebody who started as a
pretty die-hard skeptic to that stuff i
actually get it because
words like that have sort of become
infused
with things that aren't necessarily um
scientifically sound but i think that
there's very much been a case of
throwing the baby out with the bathwater
and your ability to sort of traverse
both of those and
talk about things in a scientifically
sound way but also acknowledge that the
body has
a natural way of healing and so when you
remove that from your vernacular
you go into sort of equally useless
territory yep
you know the idea that the body can heal
itself is hardly new hippocrates in the
5th century bc
said that we should revere the healing
power of nature but that idea has really
been lost in
modern times and how do you approach
that the fact that you have a degree
from harvard and botany
uh obviously i was super surprised by
that
i was surprised that they even offered
the course but was it that notion that
drew did that or was it something else
um
i was always interested in plants that's
from the time as a little kid and
uh in what way well my mother had her
green thumb
and uh we used to garden together and
and she turned me on to the growing
growing things and
fascinated by that so when i had a
chance to study botany
i jumped at it now i had the good
fortune to
be mentored by the godfather of modern
ethnobotany richard schulte's who was
director of the harvard botanical museum
so that really awoke my interest in
medicinal plants and psychoactive plants
and that was my undergraduate work and
then i went to medical school and it was
a real shock to discover that the people
teaching me subjects like pharmacology
had no knowledge of nature of the
natural sources from which drugs came
and i i think that gave me a great
advantage to have that background
in natural science and plant science now
what's the difference between
botany straight up and ethnobotanine
ethnobotany is the
uh study of plants as they are used in
other cultures particularly by
traditional peoples
uh so uh you know my mentor schulte's
had spent a great
time in south america and got me
interested in going down there and
looking at
traditional uses of plants food plants
medicinal plants
drug plants you know by native peoples
and so how does that begin to play into
your own journey
in terms of were you first drawn to
medical stuff were you first drawn to
psychedelics did you actually go
travel to these places and see how they
were being used sort of in their natural
habitat
what did that journey look like well
well actually all of that but you know i
was experimenting with psychedelics
interested in that before i went to
medical school
and interested in all this botanical
stuff and other cultures
i had a i really never saw myself being
a practicing physician i thought a
medical degree would be very useful to
me
um and it has been uh
how did you see being useful how did you
see it as being useful if you didn't
plan on practicing medicine
well first of all this was during the
vietnam war so going to medical school
was a good way of
deferring all of that and also i had too
many interests growing up and everybody
told me i had to
you know narrow down and concentrate on
something and going to medical school
made people go away you know
it but i also had a sense that given the
things i was interested in
the mind how the mind affected the body
plants
drugs that'd be very useful to me to
have a medical degree and it has been i
mean i don't think i could have done
a lot of the stuff that i've done if i
didn't have that credential
so i know that you never had like any
sort of big medical scare or anything
that led you to this were there
some early authors or something that
drew to this this seems so
this seems obscure now if somebody told
me that they were into ethnobotany
which now was psychedelics making a
resurgence you could sort of trace a
line
but back when you would have been doing
this it seems like it would be ultra
contrary to what everybody else is
pursuing what sort of began to take that
over in your mind
i think there are a lot of threads that
that played into it one was this
interest in plants as i
said went back very long i as long as i
can remember i was fascinated by the
mind and how the mind
affected the body and i tried to study
that
as a harvard undergraduate but
psychology there was
behaviorism was running rats through
mages and mazes and they weren't
interested in consciousness which
was what i was interested in talk to me
about that so i know you studied under
bf skinner
who's sort of like the godfather of
behaviorism yeah right
and people know his studies even if they
don't know him by name
and the thought that you studied
directly under him and sort of got fed
up with all of that what
what what was it about consciousness
that drew you in
and what do you why weren't they asking
those questions
well consciousness just seemed to me
that's the most fascinating thing it's
in our head what is it you know
there still is like science can't agree
as to whether consciousness is
exists apart from the brain i i'm
delighted to see these days that there
is a growing
number of people who are buying into the
idea that consciousness
exists apart from the brain that
consciousness may be primary and
pervasive are you talking about like pan
psychism
yeah yeah i think that's an exhausting
idea do you know annika harris
yes so woody that is my only foray into
pan psychism so i had her on the show
um and i if you had introduced me to the
idea before i researched it i would have
dismissed it out of hand like it sounds
patently ridiculous right
and then as i to me as somebody who is
like uh
obviously i'm fascinated by the brain
and that's been a huge driver in my own
life
but the one problem about the brain that
i have historically found
sort of i don't understand why people
are obsessed with it is consciousness
um and then so researching her reading
her book consciousness getting into pan
psychism
um it and seeing somebody so intelligent
attack this problem so seriously
it really did open a door for me what's
your take on pan psychism is that how
you
approach it is that what you think then
the punchline is going to be
i mean i don't know all i can tell you
is that from my own experiences some of
which having to do with psychedelics
i have a sense that everything is
conscious and that consciousness
pervades the universe and that that's
that is the ultimate reality
and what gives you that intuition is
that strictly psychedelics or did you
sort of have that sense before that
kicked off i can't tell you that but but
i will tell you you know i studied
hypnosis
after i finished medical school at
columbia university it was fascinating
course
and to see the power of how of the mind
caused changes in the body you know how
you can affect physical
reality by changes in the mind it's just
you know it's incontrovertible
and yet that that idea is that's not
paid attention to in medicine that was
very frustrating for me
you know the mind is seen as unreal and
that if you
observe a change in the body in a
physical system
the dogma is that the chain the cause
has to be physical
and i don't see it that way i think
cause and effect can go both ways just
as one example
you know we the the whole field of
mental health is completely dominated by
the biomedical paradigm which says that
you know all disordered thinking and
emotion is a result of disordered brain
biochemistry
and therefore the only treatment is
psychiatric medication
those drugs which are incredibly used
and overused are very ineffective
and if that if that dogma was right we
should have greater power to change
consciousness and emotion and mood
through brain chemistry why
why shouldn't it be the other way around
or why can't it go both directions why
can't disordered brain
why can't disordered emotions produce
disordered brain biochemistry
i mean i think it goes both ways but
this is a really
let's dive into that because i i think
that that is um it's very profound i
think a lot of people
miss that um so two things on that one
i would say it experientially it seems
self-evident that
thoughts when repeated are going to
hardwire like they'll become when i talk
about
um experientially it's self-evident you
feel that right the more you think
something the easier it is to think it
you return to that yeah
and when i think about it from
evolutionary perspective
that makes sense right your your brain
is calorically ravenous
and so if you're trying to have an
animal that you know is going to have
periods of
um unintentional fasting you know you're
going through a mini famine or a proper
famine it's like okay i've got to do
things to
reduce the caloric needs of the brain
and
having something that you do repeatedly
get moved off into the default mode
network so that it takes less energy to
think about it that that makes a lot of
sense
there you have a thought is literally
changing the physical structures of your
brain it's actually going through the
myelination process it's becoming
actually hardwired so that to me makes
all the sense in the world
and certainly is backed up by science in
terms of actually being able to show
that through repetition that you can
improve your skill set or that you
actually do
impact the myelination or that a
musician can change the
the actual density of brain matter in
certain regions of the brain yeah
all of that makes sense to me where i
begin to
break down my understanding maybe and
that brings in this skepticism for me
is i can buy into that notion that
reciprocal nature same with emotions and
facial expressions for instance
right so if you make a facial expression
actually makes you feel an emotion the
same way that feeling and emotion
will grant you that facial expression so
i get all of that where
where i um am skeptical is
how does that then transpose outside of
the body and
and i'll i'll anchor it with phineas
gage
right so phineas gage working on the
railroad tamping rod shoots up through
his jaw out through his brain never
loses consciousness but it fundamentally
changes his personality forever
so disturbances of the physical
structures of the brain are going to
[__] you up
how how is it then that consciousness is
somehow existing outside of that and
maybe we have to define
consciousness that might be a place to
start
i don't know that we could define it but
i know it i mean it's in it's in my head
it's a word pornography
yes it's awareness by the way i saw
phineas gage's skull once and
seriously yeah they had in a sort of
museum
addict at harvard medical school uh it
was very impressive
what wait wait did you can you see the
exit wound i'm super curious
yeah there was a big yeah absolutely how
big like
how how big are we talking bigger than
that
like that that's crazy yeah so how did
that happen i don't know but
uh i i screwed around with fire walking
for a while which always fascinated me
and it's really interesting the
scientific explanation of
of how people can walk on hot coals is
one is that there's a small layer of
air that insulates the heat that's
formed from evaporation of sweat
i mean that's [__] another one is
that cot coals don't really conduct heat
that well it's like putting your arm in
a hot oven that the air is not a good
conductor so you can keep it there for a
bit
so i have gotten my feet burned on
shorter cooler fire walks
and i've had absolutely nothing from
a 40-foot fire walk that was trying to
set a record for the longest and hottest
done
and it had to do with my mental state it
didn't have to do with any physical
explanation
uh interesting so yeah i i actually i
did fire walking as well
um i did it with tony robbins and
it was it felt dangerous like when i was
doing it
and your feet touch the heat it's like
[__] if i stop i'm
done and you really have to psych
yourself up now
did i feel like it was because of my
mental state no
but i definitely felt like i was playing
with fire quite literally so
um i could see and they warn you ahead
of time like hey people really get
burned doing this [__] so don't [__]
around don't take a selfie don't slow
down don't stop
like you need to go and they tell you i
don't know if they said the same thing
to you but you have to
say to yourself cool moss cool moss cool
moss cool moss
um and and it worked man and i've only
done it once
but it was psychologically pretty
powerful like you
feel the [__] heat man so when you
will yourself to walk across it and
everything in my body was telling me not
to do it and so when you will yourself
to do it is pretty interesting
but so are you tying that to
consciousness being outside the brain
i did not feel the [__] heat by the
way i mean i felt as i approached the
fire pit this was like a 40-foot long
very hot walk but there was no sensation
on my feet of heat it was like
walking on crunchy croutons because you
had put yourself in a psychological
state
i don't think i did i think he did
because there was like incredible group
energy and
you know he could tell when you were
ready to do it i was in a very altered
state
uh and i had no i mean i've been in
states like that
so it was a trans state of some sort my
consciousness was very focused
but in that state my body behaved
differently it was able to somehow
absorb that energy and not whereas
at other times when i tried it when i
was not in the right mental state
it felt like walking on [__] red hot
coals and i was sort of you know
leaping across and i had blisters from
that and there was pain
this was like a totally different
experience so to me
that's just that is a powerful example
of how a change in consciousness
produces a change in
how you interact with the physical world
okay so i'm down with that nothing in
that seems
too controversial to me but that doesn't
explain to me the idea of consciousness
being somehow removed from
the um the the physicality of the brain
i'll keep it to now and i know that
you're saying it's far broader than the
brain
um so let me uh re-articulate what i
heard you say so you can get the your
psychology in a place and there's such
an interconnectivity between the cells
of your body
and your brain and um so you can get
yourself into a psychological state at
which point your cells actually react
differently than you would
necessarily predict based on historical
patterns of reaction
cool i think most people will be able to
get behind that
now let's go to
if i damage phineas gage's physical
structures of his brain
fundamental things about what we would
say he is
change now that may be because we're
miss that we have a
uh assumed definition of what
consciousness is
or it may be because we really are
anchored to
our physicality um i would say
it's it probably does warrant defining
consciousness and i know that's hard
and if you're not comfortable i will
posit a definition and you can tell if
it's crazy
um but i actually think that we really
are anchored to
physical structures so can consciousness
exist apart from the brain i mean what
about
experiences of of awareness
out of your body people that have out of
the body experiences i had one as an
adolescent as a reaction to a
i had anaphylactic shock shock from a
hay fever desensitization shot
and uh you know i was not breathing and
i was rushed to a doctor's office
and i left my body i was floating
somewhere on the ceiling looking down on
it
and i was in a very blissful calm state
and i could not understand why these
people were rushing around and
they gave me an adrenaline shot and i
saw my
heart start to be fast and i was yanked
back to my body and it was very
unpleasant
that's the one experience i had of like
you know my consciousness existing
apart from my physical body interesting
but then you talk to people that have
had more profound experiences that sort
of thing has to be taken seriously
well so let's talk through that one so
um
when you talk about psychedelics i know
you've said that there are
certain drugs produce um some
well actually the way you said it was if
you have a shaman who can walk you
through something and tell you like hey
what you're going through is sort of an
expected experience
there there's a calming element to that
now the fact that it is a predictable
experience tells me that certain
situations or molecules will give a
certain
um human
interpreted reality right so it may be
that oxygen deprivation
when it gets to a certain level creates
the sense of elevating out of the body
or
maybe i don't know maybe right and so
when you get people in a very similar
physiological state they all
report that same sense of i'm looking
down at my body it's so
consistent the way that people describe
it now it could be what you're saying
right which is
hey it is so consistent that you have to
accept that there's there might be
something going on here that you don't
understand which by the way i'm actually
fully prepared to accept
um but it may also be that that's just
like the way the human mind interprets
that so so here's what i'd say i think
there is no way of deciding between
those alternatives i think they are two
different ways of looking at reality and
ourselves
so but i think you have a choice as to
which one you buy into for me
the the one that looks at consciousness
as being primary opens up a lot more
interesting possibilities
all right now that's interesting so can
you define
it makes for a more fun reality it may
even
make for some more profound changes and
if if the argument is um especially
coming from somebody who focuses on
healing the way that you do
and it's like look life is reinvented
i'm putting words in your mouth to tell
me if i'm wrong here but life has shown
me
that um you can either take your body
out of a healing state
by doing things mentally or put your
body into a healing state by doing
certain things mentally
even if it's not objectively true it
actually
has served me and others to view it that
way
like there's certainly um power in that
go ahead
but i'm interested when there is
objective confirmation of it you know
such as the
not feeling pain and no damage to the
feet that's really interesting
but what's happening there or you met
you i saw you talked about petting
bumblebees
in in one of your things i mean that was
a a very profound experience for me then
it was in it
it was in an altered state if i had not
been in that altered state i don't think
i could have pet that bumblebee
um so walk me through that that
particular example
uh was the altered state induced through
meditation
or induced through an exogenous
and i was in a substance relaxed state
in a canyon and a beautiful setting and
you know at one with everything and the
bumblebee landed in my hand i
was eating an orange and it came down to
drink some of the orange juice
and it just stayed there you know i
tried tried i'd heard somebody talk
about petting bumblebees and it just
you know [__] that sounds really
interesting so i tried to pit bumblebees
but they don't want to be petted they're
going about their business you know i
don't want to be touched
and this one just stayed there for about
i don't know 10 minutes and i was able
to pet it and it was very it was great
no maybe it was maybe it was drunk on
orange juice i don't know but it was a
wonderful experience
yeah that's interesting um i've heard
you reference the housewife lsd
experiment which i found
utterly fascinating and it would be
interesting to see
all of that from the outside right when
you hear people recount their trips
i don't know if you um how familiar you
are with sam harris but he
so did you hear his podcast about um his
heroic dose
blindfolded oh my god it is so
interesting to hear him describe what
that experience was like and i think it
was five
grams of some kind of mushroom i can't
imagine
dude it so a i've never done psychedel
well that's not true i've micro dose
because i'm a total chicken
um i've never done a a heroic dose
uh but hearing him describe it was
really really interesting and i was like
oh my god
i wish he had had a camera on it because
obviously internally he's going through
like this just
insane experience yeah what would it
look like from the outside
right so was the bumble bee really in
your hand for 10 minutes
or if we were watching it with the
camera would it be totally different
but before we um go too far off on
attention i'm super interested
because even though i'm skeptical you
cannot imagine how much i buy into the
power of thought and belief
and that whether it is objectively true
is somewhat irrelevant to me
because i'm interested in the outcome so
talk to me
it's good to be skeptical and i think
there's a difference between being an
open-minded skeptic and a closed-minded
skeptic
you know as i consider myself an
open-minded skeptic i'm willing to
look at things you know if people tell
me something is so
and i haven't experienced that myself
i'm willing to you know
look at it but until i can confirm with
my own experience
that i'm not going to buy into it but
that's different from there's so many
people
out there and i run them all the time in
science and medicine
who are closed-minded skeptics and it's
like no matter what you show them
they're not going to change the way they
think you know i had a debate with
the former editor-in-chief of the new
england journal of medicine who
challenged me to a public debate this
was some years ago
and uh it was really interesting and one
of the things we got into was about
mind-body interactions and i said to him
you know there's been
30 years of very good research in the
area of mind-body
interactions and yet the therapies that
are based on that are very
under-utilized in medicine
even though they're cost-effective
highly effective even fun
i asked them what would you do to
increase their usage his response was
there is no evidence for mind-body
interactions and then you'd
sh you'd show him something like you
know research and hypnosis he said oh
well you ca he all he even said all you
have to do is show me the evidence i
just believe in evidence so then you
show them something
that's not evidence or you call that
evidence so there's that's a cl
that's closed-minded skepticism yeah uh
that is a an utterly fascinating element
of human nature
so in business one thing i've learned is
you really do have to have
um certainty you have to have um
convictions but the best quote that i've
ever heard is
have strong convictions loosely held and
i like that
when when you're in that place because
humans respond to
when you're talking about leadership and
being able to galvanize a team and get
them pointed in a direction obviously
this is in a business context
if you don't have that certainty they
won't follow you and so
you have to be able to say i believe
this this is right we're going to do
this we're going to go hard and you you
can
inject them with that energy and you
realize how much moods are contagious
and you can get other people excited and
going
but i always tell my team ahead of time
look i have strong convictions but
they're loosely held and
the reason that i have strong
convictions that are loosely held i have
the strong conviction because we need
the clarity to move forward otherwise
we'll never
make progress but they're loosely held
because i know that the things that i
know and understand have already taken
me as far as they're going to take me
and for me to go farther than i am now i
have to develop new skills
so i'm legitimately hungry to see where
i'm wrong now that's because it
it's a whole host of what you build your
self-esteem around what your goals are
and all that stuff makes up that
cocktail of
why you would be willing to change but
when i look at human nature
and i'm just like okay you have strong
convictions great you're halfway there
but once the strong convictions become
dogma then you fall prey to the quote
andrew this keeps me up at night yeah
that genius is a young man's game
now as somebody in his mid 40s i've
absolutely a just
a dogmatic unwillingness to give myself
over to that and the only way that i can
think of to
break that is what is it about youth
that is so potent
and look it's many things obviously but
one of them is
there's a certain amount of naivete they
just don't know yet so they have these
really
bold things that they're out there
testing and trying to see if they work
but over time they calcify into dogma
and now they're not able to learn
they're not able to step out of that
they're not
they they actually the psychological
immune system kicks in
is protecting their self-narrative and
and can actually reject
empirical data and that is is so
dangerous i don't know why people
embrace that yeah i see that all the
time
yeah one thing that really scares me on
that same idea is
and i think it was planck that said it
advances in science move forward one
funeral at a time
funeral by funeral yeah and i just
thought how do you not hear that quote
and go okay cool i'm not going to fall
prey to that
yeah how how have you stayed and i we we
cannot go too far until i get you to
define what it means
for consciousness to be primary but how
do you how do you stay
nimble you know i
always go for new experiences i have
traveled very widely i put myself in
other cultures i put myself around
people who think differently from me
i consider ideas that are different from
the ones that i hold i'm willing to
change my mind
you know things that i've written if i
get new evidence i change what i've
written
in my recommendations to people so i
think it's it's
keeping flexible just as you keep your
body flexible you keep your mind
flexible
and is that just a rule that you have
for yourself or is there a value
about it i just think that's how i am
and i've always been that way and it's
been a great asset
that's really interesting um okay i i
have to know
what does it mean for consciousness to
be primary
okay the the prevailing view the
materialistic view is that consciousness
is a byproduct
of electrical activity and biochemistry
in the brain so it's secondary
and what's primary is the physical
mechanisms
the other way of looking at it is that
consciousness
exists prior to matter and has organized
matter
into more and more complex forms which
have increasing self-awareness
and as i say i don't think you can
decide between those two they're just
two different ways of looking at it
and by that you mean you can't prove it
you can't prove it
that you can never settle that question
it's just which way you choose to look
at it
but to me the idea that consciousness is
primary
not only is it very appealing but it
seems to me consistent with
as i can understand you know discoveries
in modern physics and quantum physics
that
you know that you can't disentangle the
observing mind from the physical
phenomena that you know particles pop
into existence you know i think that
that
as i said i think consciousness
organizes matter
and is primary to it that's how i choose
to look at it
and that opens up more interesting
possibilities in my life
yeah and that's that's what i want to
talk about so what possibilities does
that
open for people well one is that you you
can that if you dislike things out there
you can change them by doing operations
in your head
for example you know with with something
like a b
i i know um where i'm up where i'm
talking from up in british columbia and
we have uh
certain times here they're yellow
jackets up here that are can be quite
aggressive and nasty
and i've never had problems with them
but i know people you know if they
appear they
instinctively go like this and whatever
that internal thing is
it produces the very behavior that they
don't want
from the b you mean yeah or from i mean
many people have this experience with
dogs for example
uh you know i have i had a big
male rhodesian ridgeback all you want to
do is climb in your lap and cuddle
and i came home one day to find him
in full attack posture he had a
a worker at my place cowering against
the tree
uh brandishing a rake there was no way
of telling that guy
that it was his fear that was producing
that result you know that that was not
he thought i had trained this vicious
attack dog
and so when people flip that switch in
their mind what happens
well just the idea that you can
transform
external reality by doing
transformations in your head i think
that's a very powerful idea
you know there's a lot of things in the
world that we don't like right now you
know the world is pretty [__] up out
there
you know how can you change it well i
think that the only way you really
change is by changing
what's in your head and that influences
other people but it actually influences
physical reality as well and i think if
you know if there's a
a transformation in consciousness that
starts in you
it can catalyze that in other people and
that can really transform
our external reality all right i'm gonna
float something
i think this is what you mean but if
it's not um bring me back because it's
i'm i am
so interested uh in what's happening in
the world right now i'm legitimately
concerned for the first time in my life
um at sort of that level and
something that i when when i'm talking
about relationships so i've been um with
my wife now for almost 20 years
um we've been married 18 years
in just a couple weeks and
the thing i always tell people when you
go into an argument with your
significant other you want to fill your
heart with love now
i think that sounds stupid but i don't
have a better way to say it
but that's what it feels like and so
when i heard you say like the thing with
the dog where you just have to flip a
switch
and you you have to let it go you can't
you can't
have that fear because there is
something that you send out maybe it's
micro expressions maybe it's posture
maybe it's pheromones
maybe there is some energy i i don't
know what happens
but it's pretty clear that you give
something off that that dog is picking
up on
right is that what you mean
yes um and i don't know what it is but i
think it's
it's arising from some what's happening
in your head it's how you are perceiving
things how you're
conceiving of things how you're feeling
and that obviously has some physical
expression and the dog may be reacting
to that
yeah it's interesting when i think about
what i'm trying to get at what i'm
grasping for words for when i say fill
your heart with love is
you can shift pretty quickly between
what i'll call a neurological state
so you talk a lot about breathing so
powerful and by the way thank you
for that insight about how many cultures
breathing in spirit are the same word
yes
which is is feels to me true
um and it is interesting that we don't
have that in america
in english so english yeah strange
when when i started meditating it was
such a rapid and profound change in my
psychological state
that i was like whoa how many other ways
are there to to radically shift
um how i feel so i'll call it a shift of
frame of reference
everything feels differently when you're
calm than when you're anxious or
stressed or in fight-or-flight mode
and when i fill my heart with love and
um let's say my wife and i are arguing
we've learned that
a lot of times it's better just to stop
arguing because what you need is a
what i would translate as a change of
neurochemistry
yeah yeah yeah and once the
neurochemistry changes then you can come
back
um so talk to me about what is the the
sort of switch that people can flip or
those aren't your words and i'm very
curious to know what words you would use
where they could change their
consciousness and begin to
you know ease some of the tensions that
we're all feeling
well first of all i'm sure you're aware
of this body of research growing that
shows that
meditators actually have changed
physical structures in the brain
so that's a very powerful piece of
evidence that you know something you're
doing on the level of consciousness is
actually affecting the physical brain
now i think that's fascinating and in 20
years ago nobody no neuroscientist would
ever believe such a thing
you know one of the reasons that i teach
breathing techniques and emphasize that
i think that the breath is a very safe
place to have your consciousness
it's when you're focusing on your breath
it's like putting your
mind in neutral there's far worse places
to have your attention such as on your
thoughts or on
visual imagery which are usually the
sources of anxiety and
and unhappiness so one practical
suggestion and
that situation you mentioned is to just
focus on breathing that's like
a very safe place to have your mind and
that you know breaks that cycle that you
might be in
talk to me about mental health in
general i think that even before
everything kicked off that were you know
in the middle of right now
it'd be pretty fair to say that there's
a mental health crisis
going on talk to me about the tie
between mental health
declines and um modernity or
even affluence and what you think is
going on that's such a
big subject i have a book called
spontaneous happiness which goes into
all
of that and one is you know one is where
did this epidemic of depression come
from
you know some of it is manufactured by
the pharmaceutical industry which has
convinced people that
ordinary states of sadness are matters
of disordered brain biochemistry that
need
pharmacological treatment you know we're
supposed to be unhappy some of the time
we're not supposed to be happy all the
time
uh but i think why do you say that
that's that's pretty profound because
everything varies you know the weather
varies you know everything varies
emotions vary too
you know we're sometimes higher
sometimes lower
you don't want that to be extreme
variation and you don't want to get so
low that you're paralyzed
but it's normal to have you know
variations in mood
i think so many factors enter into
what's happening today to undermine
mental health one is disconnection from
nature
you know when you look at the few
hundred gatherer
societies that are left in the world
there is no depression
you know you don't see these anxiety
disorders well there's so many reasons
for that i mean one is they're eating
natural diets they're not plugged into
all these devices which are affecting
them
i know they're living in relatively
clean environments but i think the
connection to nature is very important
um i think that's one thing that's
undermined things i think
social isolation has greatly increased
in in our era for all sorts of reasons i
mean
now look at what's happening with the
pandemic and
more people interacting virtually rather
than in person or
you know using social media i think
having
person to person contact is very
important for mental health
so i think there's so many things that
are are undermining mental health today
nutrition a big factor you know there
are a lot of deficiencies of
micronutrients that
are affected and you know few people
have looked at that
there's a very interesting connection
between inflammation
and depression and diet that produces
inflammation which is the mainstream
western diet and that certainly is a
factor in it as well
yeah diet seems to be the one that uh
man if you were
if you were going to tell me all right
you can only recommend one change
what changes would you recommend diet
all day long um how do you and one by
the way the one piece of advice with
that is the simplest rule is you stop
eating refined processed and
manufactured food you know that's simple
that
puts you way ahead of the game yeah no
question um
give me give me some rough guidelines
around diet obviously you've stayed
incredibly sharp your entire career you
are what mid to late 70s
uh 78. yeah see i never would have
guessed that dude i had
heard that i didn't know when the
interview had been recorded but i
thought what the hell
so it's pretty extraordinary what what
are some of your tips and tricks
well i'm i'm a pescatarian i've eaten
mostly
fish and vegetables for most of my my
life i have visited japan a lot i really
like
japanese food i grow a lot on my own
food
i i love gardening and harvesting i
think it's good to eat a lot of
vegetables
um fruits in season but fruits are sugar
sources so i think you want to be more
moderate about that
i think you want to know about which
fats are good you know like
uh olive oil particularly in the fat and
fatty fish
you know it i don't think it's a good
idea to throw a home micro
macronutrient under the bus you know
either not eat fat or not eat
carbohydrate
you know they're they're different
carbohydrates some are digested slowly
and have
okay effects and some are adjusted
rapidly and are not good for you
but it's not a matter of saying grains
are bad or beans are bad
you know all these in in the right forms
are fine
i think sugar is a big is a big problem
for many of us you want to keep intake
of sugar
low um and be aware you know if there's
one change
we're in such a nutritional mess in this
country i mean things are so bad it's
hard to know where to begin you know
we've made
the unhealthiest food cheapest and most
available and people eat what's cheap
and what's available
but if there was one step we could take
that would be helpful if we could get
people to
stop drinking sweetened liquids of all
kinds it's not just
soda it's also fruit juice it's energy
drinks it's putting sugar in coffee and
tea
that one step would be great just stop
drinking sweet liquids
now is it the um the sugar what is it
specifically
about that one is that
the fructose content of sweet things
because the body can't metabolize
fructose well it deranges liver
metabolism and contributes to insulin
resistance
that's one you know one problem with it
uh i don't think you can avoid all sugar
you know i think you want to be moderate
about it and choose what you like i like
dark chocolate you know i like uh
you know i like ripe fruit once in a
while uh i i
but you know not the way people are
doing it right now
uh i i um now i'm not going to tell
people not to eat meat
but i think it's good to reduce the
percentage of animal foods in the diet
and by the way not only for your own
personal health but for planetary
health you know when you look at you
know for instance
let me just say this you know i've read
up a lot about zoonotic diseases and
pandemics in the past few months
and you know we've been subject to these
all along and we and what we're seeing
now is not necessarily as bad as it can
be i mean we could have a much worse
uh pandemic you know come around not
that far in the future
and a lot of these are new no no jokes a
lot of these are diseases that are
jumping from animals to humans
and this is happening more frequently
and more seriously and you look at why
is this happening more
speaking more seriously there are too
many people there are too many people
living in two dense concentrations
we have encroached on habitats of
animals
we have changed the climate and the way
that favors this
our agricultural practices contribute to
this and a big piece is raising animals
for food now you look at all this you
know where can you start i mean
look the hell was that too many people
problem you know
people aren't going to stop doing that
you know it just drives it drives me up
the [__] wall if i happen to hear
some radio interview and they're
interviewing some guests and they ask
how many kids they have and they say
nine and the audience applauds
i mean what the [__] now
what i've heard though is that we're
gonna peak out at like 9 billion and
then it's actually going to be
a problem of we're going to go backwards
let's hope but meantime you're not sold
it's a root problem and uh but you know
of the things that we could change the
one of them that stands out is the
is the dependence on animals for foods
because that is such a major contributor
to climate change to the
uh environmental changes that favor
these this disease jumping from animals
to humans
you know i think we got to change our
ways or we're in for worse trouble than
we're seeing now
yeah worse trouble than we're seeing now
man that's interesting and i'm glad that
you
said that um not only could we face
something that's worse we've faced
things that are worse in the past i know
that your gr your grandmother
lived through the flu of 1918. this is
fascinating i was i grew up in
philadelphia which was a city that was
the hardest hit by the 1918 flu
and this is my father's mother and she
told me stories of that when i was
pretty young
and stories included things like
horse-drawn wagons of corpses going
through the streets of philadelphia you
can imagine
the impression that made on my young mom
yeah i want to hang out with your
grandmother
that sounds like something out of the
middle ages no but then
even more interesting when i was in high
school i tried to find out about it and
there was no information
you know i looked in books i looked in
newspapers it was as if the whole thing
had been
repressed and forgotten you know it was
like so heavy
i think people couldn't deal with it and
it was only in the 1990s
that scientists began thinking about
what was it about that flu that made it
so deadly you know it killed
selectively killed young healthy people
unlike unlike what we're seeing now this
was like the many stories of
people in the peak of health who had a
headache in the morning were dead in the
evening
and only in the 1990s did people taken
interested they exhumed uh
inuit bodies in the arctic and got the
virus and began to sequence the dna
you know it took that long i think it
was there was this cultural amnesia
about this thing that killed you know
may have killed 100 million people
in six months yeah that to put it in
context have you seen the movie 1917
so fascinating right so you you get a
movie called 1917 and you see what world
war one looked like and then you realize
a year later a hundred million people
are going to die around the world from a
flu
and you you begin to understand why
people have the cultural amnesia dude
yeah exactly the life lost in world war
one
was so horrifying and then to chase that
with the deadliest flu in modern history
is like
good lord that that's a pretty gnarly
one-two punch
but we better pay attention to that
because you know that the
flu virus has the potential to do that
again you know we're very vulnerable to
that kind of stuff
and uh so i hope this the the current
pandemic will be a wake-up call
you know we screwed up badly in this
country and uh you know i hope it gives
us a chance to you know think about what
we do if we're faced with something even
worse yeah for sure when people started
referring to what we're going through
now is a dry run i thought man i really
hope
i really hope people are thinking hey
this could happen again
and the 1917 to 1918 is
is an elucidation of the fact the virus
does not care
that you've been through a lot as as a
country or a planet
it's going to happen when it's going to
happen and if you're already on your
knees from something else it will take
advantage of that
it certainly isn't going to wait so you
know
just because we're coming out of this
doesn't mean that we don't have
something else coming down the pipe
and unless we're really thinking about
what does preparation look like
it's going to be gnarly well
one one belief that i have from my
experience
in integrative medicine is that healthy
organisms are
naturally resistant so one thing you can
do
is you know you work to keep yourself in
optimum health i remember once seeing a
demonstration farm there were a field of
soybeans and
half of the crop had been deprived of of
certain nutrients the other half
was you know well nourished and
the the malnourished one was being
viciously attacked by insect predators
just chewing up and the other one was
relatively immune so that's a good
general principle you know keeping
yourself
you know in optimum health you're going
to be naturally more resistant
uh so that's you know just something
good that we should keep in mind
yeah that cycles back to diet when you
think about so my wife went through a
profound
digestive problem uh started about oh
god i think five years ago now
and realizing how much of the immune
system is actually
there in your gut absolutely right and
then
when the key piece of information for me
that just brought a lot home was
that makes sense because that's where
you're most likely to intake a pathogen
is when you eat and i thought oh my god
that really does make a lot of sense
um and so disrupting your microbiome is
going to disrupt your
overall health and so if your diet is
screwed up then your microbiome is
screwed up your immune system's in
trouble
and now you're you're a prime candidate
for getting ruined
by something like covid yep just tell
you one thing that made me think of is
that
uh one of the categories of drugs that
i'm most upset about are
the proton pump inhibitors these things
that shut off stomach acid
that are given for the gastroesophageal
reflux
you know when i was growing up there was
no such thing as gerge it was people had
heartburn and they treated it by taking
tums which is a very safe preparation of
of calcium carbonate uh and i think most
people understood that heartburn was
your stomach's way of telling you that
you had mistreated it
you know either you ate too much or too
much of the wrong things now this has
been medicalized into this condition
and the problem is seen as too much
stomach acid so we have these very
powerful drugs that shut off stomach
acid production
that's not a good idea stomach acid is
your main defense against pathogens
coming in by that root
so when people are walking around with
no stomach acid
they are breeding a lot of these germs
that get in by the oral route that can
be
you know pretty bad for us that's just
one example of you know wrong way of
thinking about things
yeah that's interesting um i think it's
really
powerful the way that you talk about
medicine right now that we've got this
super dysfunctional system that's really
just dealing with the symptoms of a
disease
rather than trying to make sure that
people don't get sick you've talked
about creating some sort of
um institution i don't know if that's a
word you would use for like health and
wellness ah god that isn't why you call
it either but
the right idea walk me through that and
how would we well first of all the
medical the medical system has
always been dysfunctional in recent
years this has just really
made it obvious but it is not a it is
not a health care system it's a disease
management system
that's functioning very imperfectly and
most of the diseases that we're trying
to manage are lifestyle related
which could be prevented if we did a
better job at promoting health and
preventing illness but they don't pay so
until we can change all that around
you're not going to get anywhere i think
the
the whole system is too dependent on
technology which is
very expensive and these escalating
costs of health care
cannot be contained it's not sustainable
it's going to sink the economy
you know we have to have a whole new way
of doing it and and i think the
first step is to shift the whole
enterprise in the direction of health
promotion and
and prevention um you know that's got to
be it you know
these chronic diseases that are you know
rampant in our society they have to do
with how people eat with how they
exercise or don't exercise if they're
how they handle stress or don't handle
it and so forth
if you're going to attack it at sort of
an institution level
what would that look like like how do we
begin to change the paradigm
the problem is the you know it's the
economics of it that
are very dysfunctional because as you
know as
bad as the system is it's generating
rivers of money
and that money is flowing at the very
few pockets it's the pockets of the big
pharmaceutical companies the
manufacturers of medical devices and the
big insurers and they don't want
anything to change and they have total
control of our elected
representatives so until that situation
changes
we're not going to get anywhere and the
only way that's going to change is if
there's a grassroots
social and political movement and enough
people get angry enough about things we
start electing different kinds of
representatives and i don't see that
happening yet
yeah it's interesting i do feel like
there is a um
the internet has given birth to a lot of
information
there are beginning to be people like
you that now have a huge voice i mean
you've always been pretty good at
getting your voice out there i mean
you've always been an iconoclast which
is pretty interesting
your staying power is extraordinary um
but you're you're now able to reach a
whole new generation of people there are
other people like you picking up that
torch
um so i'm certainly encouraged um you
know even when i look at
so i the world thinks of me more as a
business guy a mindset guy but my shows
on health
perform extraordinarily well great and
when
i first started doing them everyone was
like why well
so i started as a new i had a nutrition
company
and so i i yeah i actually started
talking about mindset people like why is
the protein bar guy talking about
mindset
and then when i started this company
people were like why is the protein bar
guy
or sorry why is the mindset guy now
talking about health and my whole thing
was look you you have got
if you want to have a life of
fulfillment joy
feeling good like you've got to take
care of your mind you've got to take
care of your body like there's just no
two ways about it
and i don't even find the stuff around
the body that interesting like i wish i
didn't need to work out i wish i could
just eat ice cream all day that would
truly be
like if i could live and be healthy and
be like you know still
cognitively there yeah that would be
extraordinary but it
unfortunately doesn't work that way so
i'm like if you want to
perform at the highest level if you want
to find success however you define it i
promise you're going to have to think
about the body
and so i'm super encouraged by how well
the the things that i do around health
are doing so
that's great good to hear yeah i i hope
that
this is the beginning of a groundswell
where younger people are certainly
taking it more seriously
um you know than people have
historically
that would be huge you know you know
yeah i think
we should be doing real health education
from kindergarten on up
you know the basic principles are not
that hard i mean just as an example
i think many people young people don't
know that all the muscle mass
and all the bone mass you have for life
are built up mostly in your teenage and
teenage years and early twenties you
know once you get to your late twenties
that stops and it's all downhill from
there
and all you can do after that is slow
loss you can't add new
tissue so is that true even if you do
hrt yes
yes it is that is profoundly bad news
i know but if you want if people
understood that
that would be real motivation you know
in in when you're young to really
do not do stupid things that are going
to undermine bone formation
and and muscle mass i think you know i
think people will move in the right
direction
if they get the idea and they have
motivation to do it it's not that hard
to explain those things
yeah a lot of this comes down to who
you're around who you listen to
who you choose to get your information
from and putting you in context and the
more that we talk
the more i am driven to find out more
about your grandmother
the fact that she was telling you
stories about corpses being wielded
through the the streets um what was that
like
was your family like unusual uh
you are so iconoclastic like it was a
very
middle-class very middle-class family my
parents were shopkeepers they had a
ladies hat store
i couldn't imagine anything less
interesting than selling ladies hats
but the good thing was that they
encouraged me they both encouraged me to
follow my curiosity and my passion
um and i was a very curious person i was
interested in experimenting and
doing stuff and they did not uh not try
to
stop to squash that that's cool are you
still experimenting with stuff now and
if so what what are you on right now
well i'm always doing i'm always looking
for new foods and things you know as you
know i have a matcha company
and i'm a great believer in matcha green
tea i
uh i have never had matcha ever you've
never had much at how wonderful
i don't even know what it tastes like i
have no concept it's literally and if
the good stuff is delicious but there's
a lot of really bad matcha out there
because it oxidizes very quickly and
it's worth telling people what it is
because until i started researching you
i didn't know what it was
it's the powdered form of green tea
that's uh used in
traditionally in the tea ceremony in
japan but now has escaped that
uh it's from tea leaves that are grown
in special conditions they're heavily
shaded a few weeks before harvest so the
leaves get thinner
and they produce more chlorophyll and
more bioactive compounds
and it produces this brilliant green
powder it's just beautiful and it's
whisked into water
i i drink it unsweetened than the
traditional way but it's it's uh
the only preparation of tea that you in
which you consume the whole leaf and it
has a very high content of antioxidants
and
beneficial phytonutrients it tastes
great and
i can't believe you've never tasted
matcha so i will send you some with
directions how to try it it's great
so that's my main beverage and i'm
always when i travel around i'm always
looking for new things that i can bring
back and
and play with uh i don't know
i'm curious i'm experimental i try
things you know i i
i'm on the uh my house is on the ocean
here the ocean's pretty cold and i try
to jump in the ocean every day so when
we finish talking i'm gonna go jump in
the ocean
nice that's no joke anybody that's never
been in the water in the pacific
northwest
whoa like it isn't cold like california
oceans california oceans are chilly
washington it's like being stabbed with
knives i can only imagine it's even
colder
when you go up into canada so uh you're
a brave man
i like to do that well i'm always
experimenting that's interesting so i
want to talk about some of the
when you take somebody who has a medical
degree
who's experienced in botany and who
experiments
talk to me about some of the plants that
we should be experimenting whether it's
for allergies i've heard you talk about
that i actually want to try what i know
you will suggest for that
you know talk to me about mdma or
some of the other psilocybin and stuff
all right the allergy plant is
nettles uh sometimes called stinging
nettles and oh yes i've been stung by
them
yeah well a freeze-dried preparation of
the leaves
is the most effective allergy remedy
i've ever found
no first capsules yeah for like sneezing
itchy eyes that kind of stuff with hay
fever
makes the symptoms go away within
minutes no side effects
and i i find that if when i started
using that instead of anything else
over a couple of years my allergy
symptoms really faded away
i've given that to many many people it's
a wonderful example of an herbal remedy
really good
uh you mentioned mdma i mean this is the
probably is going to be made legal for
treatment of post-traumatic stress
disorder
uh you know very how do you think that
works so well and what's mdma derived
from
it's a semi-synthetic uh drug
that is related to chemicals found in a
few plants it's it's in the amphetamine
family
but it has a completely unique effect of
just producing
a calmness and heart opening and i think
as a therapeutic agent very powerful
so i've had a i've had a lot of good
experience with that psilocybin
you know that probably is going to be
made available for treatment of drug
resistant depression and obsessive
compulsive disorder i think that's a
little trickier because
i mean that's very important to take
that you know with a guide and a proper
setting to ensure that the experience is
you know channeled in a good direction i
i'm fascinated to see
these things becoming mainstream today
you know after all this time
i think there's a lot of therapeutic
potential there so
talk to me a little bit about marijuana
so there are people in my life
who are extraordinarily enthusiastic
about marijuana um i've tried it a few
times and dude
i don't know what it is sex is rad sex
on on marijuana is
awesome and if i could turn it on and
off uh i would do it
a lot but the problem is then after that
you've got four or five more hours of
feeling like somebody is pressing play
and pause on my brain
i absolutely hate it uh but i
i want to like drugs as weird as that
sounds like i want them to take me to
some place that's creative and new and
open doors of perception and all of that
um so talk to me a little bit about
marijuana do you think that they're just
people
metabolize it differently like yeah i
think it it
affects people so differently you know
some people can smoke it
before pop before they go to bed and it
helps them sleep and other people say if
they do that they're awake online
so it's very individual reactions to it
and there's so many different
preparations of the day in
in my life it was very useful to me
in my in my 20s you know i used it
frequently it i had a lot of great
experiences with it socially
uh you know hedonistically i'd help it
stimulated my imagination and then
in my 30s it started being it just made
me
sedated and stupid and sometimes
paranoid
and it just was an unproductive habit
and it's
it ceased being an ally for me and i
haven't used it in many many years i
have no interest in it
and when i look at that you know i'm
interested in the possible medicinal
uses of it but they're too
that's confusing because there's so many
different preparations of it out there
i don't know what's in them it's very
hard to advise people how to use it
and people react to it so differently
it's very non-toxic
so i think it's worth trying to find
ways to to use it medically but
you know obviously you're someone that's
not that's not the right fit
yeah sadly i've tried edible i've tried
smoking it um
because there are so many people in my
life that
honestly when i watch the way that it
shifts their personality
i like it i like the way it shifts their
personality yeah right and
and it takes them from like a a
hard-edged
like they they almost seem frustrated
and agitated and then when they smoke
and a low level i mean they're lovely
people whether they're
you know smoking or not but there really
was it was watching them smoke and
thinking they don't get dumb
they are still there you can it feels
quite frankly unless they tell me
they've smoked in the beginning i
wouldn't have known
whereas i feel like it's patently
obvious like i i collapse in on myself
i don't want to talk to anybody that's
the
yeah it's so interesting um
d are there certain things that you
think people should
try i'll even grant that you're saying
only medically supervised and all of
that all the sort of safety caveats
but are there certain things that people
should give a shot like i'm desperate to
try mdma
for instance you should try mdma that
would be a very good one for you
i think that the risk of a bad
experience with that is very
very small and uh i think you could
would find that very useful
what do you think about it i've heard of
people combining
mdma with some sort of psychedelic i
don't know if it's psilocybin or
mushrooms yes but don't do that until
you've tried
mdma on its own okay do that first that
would be that'd be fine
and let me know i'd be interested how
you like it yeah no i'll report back for
sure that would be extraordinary
uh should i have it with my my new tea
my matcha or
uh treat those two things separately
well you should have matcha by itself
first
and see if you like it and then see if
you want to make that part of your daily
ritual
very fair uh i've had so much fun man
thank you so much for coming on tell
people where they can
find out more about you your matcha your
restaurants
when you get a chance to talk about your
restaurants uh yeah give people a quick
rundown
so uh i have a website dr
wild.comrweil.com a great deal of
of health information there uh i direct
this
a academic center at the university of
arizona college of medicine
it's now called the andrew weil center
for integrative medicine and
you can look at
integrativemedicine.arizona.edu we train
physicians and other health
professionals it's a really good you
know a really good thing
i have many books which are all
available in print all available on
amazon
uh on you know a variety of subjects the
restaurants are true food kitchen
i think we have 30 of them now um you've
been to
one i assume or more i actually haven't
eaten it once i
i i didn't know they were you to be
honest it wasn't until i was doing the
research and i was like what
uh so yeah it's great a lot of the
recipes are mine and it's my
anti-inflammatory diet and uh you know
that that's a really good thing
the matcha company is uh we got the url
matcha.com
so uh just look at matcha.com and
uh i will send you some samples for you
to try
nice i'm looking forward to it well
again thank you so much for joining me
guys if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential